# Advent of Code 2025

## Day 1: Secret Entrance

The circular dial has 100 numbers, so to determine the position of the arrow after a rotation, we just have to add the rotation distance if it is a right rotation, subtract it if it is a left rotation, and take the modulus by 100.

For **Part 1** we just need to check if the new position is 0, in which case we increase the password number by 1.

For **Part 2** we need to check how many times we point at 0 in rotating the dial.
In the example we only have rotations that point at 1 at most once, but it the actual input there are longer rotations that point at 0 several times.
For example if we are pointing at 42 and we rotate right by 390 clicks, we will point at 0 4 times.
This number is obtained by dividing the sum of the initial position and the rotation distance (42 + 390 = 432) by 100 (4).

In the case of left rotations, we may point at 0 even if this sum is smaller than 100.
For example, if we're pointing at 5 and we rotate left by 10, the sum will be -5 (because left rotations are negative) but we will point at 0 once.

A way of solving it is to see left rotations as mirrors of right rotation: take the mirror image of the dial, the position of the arrow will be 100 minus the original position (or just 0 if it is 0), and rotate right instead.
In our case, the mirror position is 95 (100-5), rotating right by 10 gives 105, dividing by 100 gives 1.

## Day 2: Gift Shop

A brute force approach is to check every number in each range, split it in two and check if the two halves are equal (or split it in *k* for Part 2).
This approach works, but is inefficient: it takes about a minute for Part 2 on my laptop.

A different approach is to **generate** all the incorrect IDs in a range: a bit of arithmetic's will determine the sequence of digits whose double (or *k*-repetition) is the first incorrect ID in the range; similarly determine the sequence that gives the last incorrect ID in the range. Then take all the ID generated by the sequences in between.

## Day 3: Lobby

To turn on *k* batteries, choose the highest among the first *n-k+1* digits, where *n* is the length of the bank; then recurse to turn on *k-1* batteries in the digits following the one that you picked. 

## Day 4: Printing Department

The direct approach is, for every roll, to compute the number of rolls in adjacent positions. Then accessible ones have fewer that 4.
For **Part 1** just count them.

For **Part 2**, count and remove the accessible rolls, then repeat until there are no accessible once any more.

This is quite inefficient because you count the same rolls each time.
A more efficient way is to use a map that associate to the coordinates of each roll the number of adjacent rolls: starting with 0 for all, for each roll increase the count of its neighbours by one.

In **Part 2** remove the accessible ones and decrease the count of their neighbours by 1.

## Day 5: Cafeteria

**Part 1**: for every food ID, check if it is within any of the ranges.

**Part 2**: first fuse overlapping ranges together, then add up their sizes.

## Days 6-8

I'll add explanations later

## Day 9: Movie Theater

**Part 1** is trivial: just compute the areas of all the rectangles and take the largest

**Part 2** is much more challenging: the main problem is determining if a rectangle is contained in the loom. To do that I'm checking three properties:
  1. The points of the loop are outside the rectangle, where the perimeter of the rectangle counts as outside;
  2. The centre of the rectangle is inside the loop: I did this by checking that the winding number of the loop with respect to the centre is non-zero;
  3. None of the polygon edges crosses the rectangle.
  
This worked to solve the puzzle, but it is not completely sound.
Point 2 may give the wrong answer for flat rectangles, because the centre is on the perimeter.
Point 3 may give the wrong answer if there are two adjacent edges crossing the triangle in opposite directions, so there won't be any outside space between them.

Apparently these limit cases did not change the correct answer to the puzzle and the solution worked.
